July, Jul. 31, 2026.
REPORT ON THE SITUATION IN RWANDA FROM July 15 to 31, 2026
Politics and Diplomacy
*Turkey: Rwandans celebrate 32 years of Rwanda's liberation through various games, 21 July 2026. Rwandans living in Turkey, joined their friends in celebrating 32 years of Rwanda's liberation, with participants being shown that the goal of the liberation struggle is not only to achieve victory, but also to preserve what has been achieved and continue to build on it.
The event took place on 18 July 2026 in Ankara, the capital of Turkey.
The event was marked by various games and talks on the journey of Rwanda's liberation as well as joy expressed in dance and songs, with a special emphasis on the role of the youth in preserving what has been achieved.
Liberation Day is usually celebrated on July 4, but this year its activities in Turkey were postponed to July 18 due to various international conferences held in Ankara at that time, which caused the activities of many embassies to temporarily change dates.
The event included a cycling race, a walking race, a ping pong (table tennis) competition, discussions on the history of the Rwandan liberation struggle, and a concert featuring songs that characterized the liberation struggle.
The winners of some of the various competitions received various awards.
In the cycling race, Umut Akçaoğlu from Turkey came first, followed by Camille Niyonkuru who came second and Pascal Nshuti who came third.
In the running race, Lea Mujawimana came first, followed by Rulisa Briella and Laurence Uwonkunda Kayitare. In the table tennis match, the Rwandan Ambassador to Turkey, Lt. Gen. (Rtd) Charles Kayonga, won first place, followed by Nicole Cyuzuzo.
There was also a panel discussion moderated by the Rwandan Ambassador to Turkey, Lt. Gen. (Rtd) Charles Kayonga, together with the Military Attaché, Col. Jean Paul Rulisa, Capt. Claudette Nishimwe, and Murenzi Lucas, Commercial Affairs Officer at the Rwandan Embassy in Turkey, as well as Dr. Faustin Hategekimana.
The discussions focused on the journey of Rwanda’s liberation, emphasizing the courage and dedication of the young men and women who were members of the former RPA in the struggle to liberate the country and stop the Genocide against the Tutsi in 1994.
They also highlighted their role in rebuilding the country and the opportunities that today’s youth have enjoyed due to the leadership that promoted unity and reconciliation after the Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
Ambassador Lt. Gen. (Rtd) Charles Kayonga explained that the liberation struggle went through various stages, including the one that ended on July 4, 1994, when the RPA defeated the regime that had planned and implemented the Genocide against the Tutsi.
He stressed that although the armed conflict ended 32 years ago, Rwanda continues to struggle to rebuild the country, develop the economy and continue changes aimed at improving the quality of life and sustainable development.
Ambassador Lt. Gen. (Rtd) Charles Kayonga urged the participants of this ceremony to always remember the lessons of history that led Rwanda to the Genocide against the Tutsi, pointing out that politics based on any kind of discrimination can lead the country to disaster.
He recalled that the 2003 Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda abolished all forms of discrimination, including ethnic discrimination and divisive ideology.
He continued by saying that good governance has enabled today's youth to grow up in Rwanda in peace, unity and progress.
He urged them to strive to preserve what the country has achieved and to reject divisive ideologies that continue to create insecurity and violate the rights of citizens in some parts of the region.
Also during this ceremony, Rwandan students who completed their studies at various universities in Turkey were commended for their efforts and good academic performance.
They were encouraged to continue to be exemplary and use the knowledge they have gained to develop Rwanda. The youth were encouraged to continue to dedicate themselves and contribute to the development of the country.
The event concluded with a concert featuring songs and dances that hark back to the history of the liberation struggle, as part of the celebration of 32 years of Rwanda's liberation.
*Kinshasa: Anglican Church insists AFC/M23 are ‘brothers’ who should not be excluded from talks, 22 July 2026. The leadership of the Anglican Church in the Democratic Republic of Congo has announced that Congolese fighters and members of the AFC/M23 movement should not be excluded from the peace talks being planned.
This message was delivered by the Church’s Spokesperson, Pastor Eric Nsenga, after its and Catholic Church representatives met with DRC President Félix Tshisekedi on 17 July 2026, and he agreed to hold “informal talks” aimed at resolving the country’s problems.
Following these talks, DRC Government Spokesperson, Patrick Muyaya, signaled that the participants in the Congolese talks would not include those who had taken up arms and those who had not openly condemned what he called the provocations taking place in the east of their country.
The DRC government has repeatedly attacked AFC/M23 fighters, sometimes calling them foreigners, criminals and terrorists, and sometimes accusing them of being tools of foreign powers. This shows that it is not ready to join this group in the inter-Congolese talks.
Pastor Nsenga said that the Catholic and Anglican Churches cannot support the inclusion of the AFC/M23 led by Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo in the talks between the Congolese and the DRC government, and that this has been shown to them by Tshisekedi.
He said, “Can we now say that those who took up arms, the group of Corneille Nangaa, are not being listened to? No, that is not what we can say. That is why you saw us in Goma. At that time, we had a serious conversation with President Félix. I will tell you. The president said that there would be provocations.”
The pastor said that in February 2025, the Catholic and Anglican Churches told Tshisekedi that there may be a real provocation but that Goma is controlled by Congolese who have taken up arms and have a reason to fight.
He said, “Instead of dwelling on this issue of saying that an armed group is a provocation, let’s look at how we can solve the problems of the children of the country. That is why we went to Goma, we listened to those who are in Goma. They are our brothers. There are things they have said, we have heard them.”
Pastor Nsenga stressed that this is not the time to continue the issue, but that each side should be listened to. He explained that the AFC/M23 has a reason to fight and that the Catholic and Anglican Churches, as mediators, have no responsibility to undermine the reasons people give.
*President Trump appoints US Ambassador to Rwanda July 22, 2026. President Donald Trump has appointed a well-known diplomat in Africa, Nicholas 'Nick' Checker, to the position of US Ambassador to Rwanda.
The announcement released by the Office of the President of the United States on July 21, 2026, shows that Nicholas Checker from the State of Wisconsin, is among the people appointed by the President to go to various positions of the State, but they must first be approved by the Senate.
Among those presented to the Senate, Nicholas Checker was asked to be the Ambassador representing the United States of America in Rwanda.
While the US Senate will confirm him, Checker will be given the task of representing his country in Kigali, where he will be responsible for continuing to develop relations between Rwanda and the United States of America.
Normally, the US Ambassador to another country is appointed by the President of the United States, but must first be confirmed by the Senate before starting his duties.
Checker was previously the US State Department Director of Cooperation with South Africa and Foreign Aid.
From June 1 to July 18, 2026, he was the Director General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in charge of cooperation with Africa.
He served as Deputy Executive Secretary of the United States Security Council; He became a CIA agent from 2014 to 2025, where he oversaw security in the Middle East and the Horn of Africa.
When Rwandans began commemorating the 32nd Genocide against the Tutsis, on April 7, 2026, Checker was the first American leader to use the appropriate title of this history.
At that time, he said, "I myself visited Rwanda, and I saw with my own eyes the places where the Genocide took place, in Nyamata and Ntarama, where the churches used to be, where thousands of Tutsis were brutally killed by extremists."
Ambassador Checker said that he stood in front of the altars of those churches, overcome by the gravity of what happened.
He said, "On the altar where the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass is offered, where the blood of Jesus is shown as the salvation of the world, the blood of innocent people in the Genocide against the Tutsis is mixed."
This diplomat pointed out that in order for the world not to experience Genocide again, countries are required to give justice to the survivors by prosecuting those who participated, and that the United States will continue to work with Rwanda to achieve this.
Ambassador Checker will replace Eric Kneedler who left Rwanda in January 2026. For the past six months, the US Embassy in Kigali was headed by Chargé d'Affaires John Armiger.
*Pakistan ratifies MoUs with Rwanda on trade cooperation, 22 July 2026. The government of Pakistan has ratified a memorandum of understanding signed between the country and Rwanda on trade cooperation.
The partnership will be implemented through Pakistan’s “Look Africa” development initiative.
The agreement will be used to establish mechanisms to promote trade between the two countries, including the establishment of a joint Pakistan-Rwanda trade group, regular high-level dialogues and close cooperation with the business community in both countries.
Pakistan began sharing a draft of the bilateral trade agreement with Rwanda in July 2018.
After extensive discussions through diplomatic channels, inter-ministerial talks and virtual meetings between leaders of both countries, Pakistan and Rwanda agreed to replace the existing agreement with a more comprehensive and easier-to-implement one.
The decision by the Government of Pakistan has paved the way for the signing of the final agreement, which will provide for private sector cooperation, trade fairs and exhibitions, cooperation between business associations, the establishment of a Joint Business Council, promotion of joint projects, exchange of trade-related information and the removal of non-tariff barriers to trade.
Pakistan launched its “Look Africa Policy” in 2017, with the aim of increasing its exports, attracting investment and strengthening economic ties with African countries.
The program aims to help Pakistan expand its markets beyond its current markets through diplomatic efforts, trade agreements, private sector engagement and participation in regional trade fairs.
This is in line with Rwanda’s ambitions, especially as it has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies in Africa and is known as a hub for trade and investment in Africa, making it a key partner for Pakistan in expanding its trade activities in the region.
Rwanda and Pakistan share relations and cooperation in various fields including education, political consultations, diplomatic cooperation, cooperation between the Rwandan Armed Forces and Pakistani security agencies, trade and others.
In April 2026, it participated in the International Tourism Expo being held in Pakistan, where it showcased its unique tourism industry and its natural beauty to the participants.
In 2025, Rwanda opened its embassy in Pakistan, while this Asian country opened its embassy in Rwanda in 2021.
In the same year, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation, Olivier Nduhungirehe, announced that Rwanda and Pakistan are in talks aimed at promoting trade and tourism between the two sides, so that in the future, non-stop flights between the two countries will be launched.
On July 15, 2024, Ambassador Fatou Harerimana presented credentials to the President of Pakistan, Asif Ali Zardari, authorizing her to represent Rwanda in that country.
Pakistan is among the top importers of some of Rwanda's products such as tea, coffee, avocados and other agricultural and livestock products.
Rwanda imports medical equipment, rice, clothing materials, agricultural technology and others.
*The context of the inter-Congolese talks announced by Tshisekedi, 22 July 2026. The President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Félix Tshisekedi, announced that he would launch talks aimed at finding a solution to the political and security problems facing the country, indicating that he wants to create a broad community to fight the war in the east.
Tshisekedi had put forward a project to change the Constitution; the idea was opposed by political opponents including Martin Fayulu, Delly Sesanga and Jean-Marc Kabund who founded the ‘C64’ coalition with the aim of challenging him.
On 17 July 2026, the leaders of the main religious groups in the DRC met with President Tshisekedi to discuss ways to calm the simmering tensions. It was then that he decided to launch “permanent talks” to unite the inter-Congolese.
While Tshisekedi has said he wants to use the talks as a weapon to confront the AFC/M23 coalition that controls much of eastern DRC, his opponents say they have not yet received any details.
What is known about the talks
So far, not much is known about the talks, but analysts agree that Tshisekedi's announcement is a good step, as he has been asked to launch them for a long time but has not done so.
Preparations are underway to organize the talks, but the dates and venue have not yet been announced.
The Catholic Archbishop of Kinshasa, Cardinal Fridolin Ambongo, said that the conditions and the way the talks will proceed will become clearer as the days go by. He is one of those who met with Tshisekedi last week.
Jeune Afrique reported that President Tshisekedi is expected to sign a decree officially launching the program, and that a committee will be set up to prepare and oversee them.
Some opposition figures have called for the talks to be held outside the country, while others have called for confidence-building measures between the conflicting parties, such as the release of political prisoners. The government has confirmed that the talks will be held in Kinshasa.
The government is reportedly considering returning the passports of some of the opposition members, but has rejected a request to commute the sentences of some of the most prominent figures, including those accused of being members of armed groups.
*Rwanda and Poland signed an agreement to make it easier for embassy staff to find work, 24 July 2026. Rwanda and Poland signed an agreement to help embassy staff to find work and make it easier to work in those countries.
It is an agreement signed on July 24, 2026, in the capital of Poland, Warsaw.
The Secretary of State in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland, Wojciech Zajaczkowski, and the outgoing Ambassador of Rwanda in that country, Prof. Shyaka Anastase, signed the agreement between the two countries that allows them to carry out beneficial activities for members of the families of diplomats and other embassies of the two countries.
ZajaczKowski, who has Africa in his responsibilities, praised the progress that has been made, pointing out that Rwanda is the first country to sign such an agreement in Africa.
He said, "We are proud of the relationship we have with Rwanda and how it is growing...Rwanda is the first country where we have signed such an agreement, on the African continent".
Amb Prof Shyaka, also thanked the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Government of Poland, for the way they value good relations and cooperation with Rwanda.
He said, "Rwanda is proud of the good cooperation with Poland, as we treat you as one of our best friends".
The relationship between Rwanda and Poland has been going on for over 61 years, but the last five years have been a special part of the partnership between the two countries.
Some of the achievements include the fact that both countries have established permanent embassies and Poland has become one of Rwanda's major economic partners.
The two countries also have cooperation agreements in various sectors aimed at the development of their people.
*President Kagame meets with Gen Muhoozi on regional security, 25 July 2026. President Kagame received the Chief of Defence Staff of Uganda, Gen Muhoozi Kainerugaba, for discussions focused on the strong relationship between Rwanda and Uganda, peace and security in the region.
The talks that brought together the two sides took place in Kigali on 25 July 2026, when Gen Muhoozi was on a working visit to Rwanda.
It is expected that during the two-day visit, Gen Muhoozi will discuss with senior Rwandan military leaders on strengthening military-to-military relations between the two countries.
A message posted on the X account of the Office of the Head of State Village Urugwiro reads: “President Kagame received the Chief of Defence Staff of Uganda, Gen Muhoozi Kainerugaba. Their discussions focused on the strong relationship between Rwanda and Uganda, peace and security in the region.”
Gen Muhoozi was last in Rwanda in March 2025. At that time, he discussed with senior Rwandan military leaders on bilateral cooperation, and visited the Nyakinama Military Academy in Musanze District.
At this academy, Gen Muhoozi delivered lectures on cooperation between African countries in maintaining peace and security.
*President Kagame sends message to Ghanaian counterpart, 26 July 2026. President Paul Kagame sent a message to his Ghanaian counterpart, John Dramani Mahama, through the President of the African School of Governance (ASG), Francis Gatare, who was on a working visit to Accra.
This message from President Kagame, Francis Gatare, was delivered to Julius Debrah, Director General of the Office of the President of Ghana, on 25 July 2026.
The Rwandan Embassy in Ghana announced that during the talks, Gatare briefed Julius Debrah on the activities of the school of governance in Kigali, where it has made progress in promoting research and education in the field of governance.
Gatare was accompanied by the Rwandan Ambassador to Ghana, Rosemary Mbabazi, who participated in the talks that focused on the relationship between the two countries and the ongoing expansion of cooperation between Rwanda and Ghana.
During their discussions, they also discussed the African School of Governance’s partnership with the Accra Reset initiative, as well as how Rwanda and Ghana can continue to work together to promote cooperation and integration in Africa.
Accra Reset is an initiative that aims to bring together leaders, scholars, investors and other stakeholders to discuss how Africa can rethink its development and find new solutions to the challenges facing the continent.
It is a forum based on ideas for reforming governance, economics, technology and cooperation between African countries, with the aim of promoting solutions that come from within Africa rather than relying heavily on aid or solutions from outside it.
The African School of Governance is a school that aims to contribute to building future leaders through education, research and the provision of knowledge in the fields of public policy and governance.
Francis Gatare's visit to Ghana comes as the two countries continue to develop relations and cooperation in various fields, with the aim of maintaining a partnership that benefits their peoples and the African continent as a whole.
*Minister Bizimana's response to Belgian journalist who mocked Rwandans over the death of King Rudahigwa, 26 July 2026. The Minister of Rwandan Unity and Civic Engagement, Dr Jean Damascène Bizimana, responded to Belgian journalist Peter Verlinden, who criticized him after writing about the death of King Mutara III Rudahigwa, saying that what he had said was a "distortion of history" and that there was no evidence that the King had been assassinated.
The controversy began after Minister Bizimana posted on the X website on 25 July 2026, returning to the death of King Mutara III Rudahigwa, saying that his death was one of the most important and sad dates in Rwandan history that should not be forgotten.
In his message, Minister Bizimana said that on Saturday, July 25, 1959, shortly after 5:30 p.m., King of Rwanda Mutara III Rudahigwa, who was born in Nyanza in March 1911, passed away at the Prince Regent Hospital in Bujumbura.
He said that the death of Mutara III Rudahigwa was the result of an injection administered by a Belgian doctor named Dr. Vyncke, emphasizing that this was a political crime, and that it led Rwanda to a period of discrimination and persecution against the Tutsi from November 1959 until the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi.
Following the message, Peter Verlinden, a Belgian journalist and author, responded by saying that what Minister Bizimana said was a change of history.
Verlinden said that King Rudahigwa was not killed, so the idea that he was killed for political reasons is baseless.
Later, Verlinden reiterated that the fact that a Minister of State accuses another country of political killings is a serious problem, saying that this is a distortion of history.
Minister Bizimana asked him not to interfere in Rwandan history
In response, Minister Bizimana said that what he wrote was the history of his country and that he could not allow people outside Rwanda to change it or try to erase its evidence.
He said: “This is the history of my country, and I want to remind you. What gives you the right to interfere in the life of a country that is not yours and does not concern you?”
Minister Bizimana continued by saying that his presentation of the truth about Rwandan history should not be called distortion, but rather a confrontation with those who want parts of history to be forgotten.
He said, “Because I reveal things that you want to hide and erase, you call me a distorter of history to support your colonialist ideas and denial of history.”
Minister Bizimana also said that many years after Rudahigwa was killed, in 1994, Belgium expelled Queen Gicanda Rosalie who had gone to this country for medical treatment, knowing full well that she would be killed in the Genocide.
*Rwanda, Kenya to collaborate to boost tourism, 26 July 2026. Rwanda and Kenya have launched talks aimed at building tourism cooperation with a view to increasing visitor numbers to the two countries and promoting a common tourism vision in East Africa.
The talks are being led by the Kenya Tourism Board (KTB), in partnership with Rwanda Air, RwandAir and tourism stakeholders.
The talks began at a consultative meeting held in Kigali last week, which brought together over 50 participants including travel and tourism business leaders, hotel investors, government representatives and tourism stakeholders from Rwanda and Kenya.
The Counsellor at the Kenyan Embassy in Kigali, Esther Magiti, said that the summit not only reinforces the existing good relations between the two countries, but also provides a platform for expanding cooperation.
She said, “This summit reflects the long-standing good relations between Kenya and Rwanda, and is an important platform to build partnerships, share knowledge and further promote cooperation in tourism.”
She continued by saying that the two countries have great potential to benefit from greater cooperation.
Magiti also said that Rwanda and Kenya have many tourist attractions, including wildlife tourism, coastal tourism on the Kenyan side, and cultural and heritage tourism.
They also share common interests in MICE tourism and other people-to-people exchanges, as well as investment opportunities that can attract people from Africa and beyond.
Magiti said it is part of Kenya’s ongoing efforts to promote tourism cooperation through expanding air services, facilitating travel and tourism between East African Community countries, and supporting activities that increase the number of tourists.
The KTB Regional Director for Tourism Development, Alex Tunoi, said the meeting is part of Kenya’s plan to increase the number of tourists from Rwanda and other East African countries.
He said, “This meeting is part of a special partnership between KTB and RwandAir that aims to connect over 50 travel and tourism companies and operators. It will be done through dialogue between investors, promoting tourist attractions and sharing knowledge.”
These talks follow an agreement signed by the Governments of Rwanda and Kenya on June 29, 2026.
It aims to simplify and streamline the importation of petroleum products, allowing Rwanda to use Kenyan infrastructure to import petroleum products from various sources around the world.
*Rwanda and Tanzania in talks to strengthen ties, 27 July 2026. The Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Rwanda, Olivier Nduhungirehe, visited Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, where he held talks with his counterpart, Amb. Mahmoud Thabit Kombo, Minister of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Tanzania, aimed at strengthening relations between the two countries.
The talks between the two leaders took place on Sunday, 26 July 2026. In addition to Nduhungirehe, on the Rwandan side were also attended by Gisa Teta, Head of Africa at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Gen. Patrick Nyamvumba, Rwandan Ambassador to Tanzania.
The Rwandan Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that their talks focused on “strengthening relations between the two countries”.
Minister Nduhungirehe's visit comes as Rwanda and Tanzania continue to work to further enhance cooperation in various fields, based on the bilateral relationship and the fact that they are members of the East African Community.
This relationship has also been marked by visits by senior leaders of both countries.
In May 2026, President Paul Kagame visited Tanzania, where he held talks with President Samia Suluhu Hassan.
During the visit, the two leaders discussed issues related to further developing relations between Rwanda and Tanzania, as well as strengthening cooperation in areas of mutual interest.
At that time, President Kagame identified Tanzania as a key partner.
He said, “Tanzania is a key partner of Rwanda. Over the years, we have developed cooperation in various sectors, especially trade and transport, to facilitate Rwanda’s access to the international market. The President and I discussed how we can build on that foundation, to ensure that our cooperation model can increase investment and trade between our countries.”
He continued by saying, “We are proud of the progress that has been made, and we look forward to the implementation of our joint projects.”
This visit by President Kagame was followed by that of his counterpart, President Suluhu, to Kigali in May 2026.
Rwanda and Tanzania already have strong relations based on the fact that they are neighboring countries, united in the East African Community.
They have cooperation agreements in the areas of promoting trade, transport, investment and other development activities.
*Rwanda has granted citizenship to over 100 people, mostly Burundians and Congolese, 28 July 2026. Rwanda has granted citizenship to 105 people born in 27 countries, mostly Burundians and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
A statement released by the country's immigration authority shows that among those granted citizenship, 26 were born in Burundi, 20 were born in the DRC, nine were born in Uganda and eight were born in the United States.
They include six born in Belgium, five born in Cameroon, four born in Kenya and three born in Rwanda to parents of foreign origin.
Canada, the Netherlands, the Republic of Congo, Switzerland and Tanzania each have two people born in their country who have been granted Rwandan citizenship.
About 60% of those granted Rwandan citizenship are between 30 and 49 years of age, who appear to have the potential to contribute to the country's development.
The next largest group are those aged between 50 and 64, those over 65, and youth under 30. The youngest is 5 years old, the oldest is 81 years old.
Rwandan citizenship came into effect on July 24, 2026, according to the official gazette in which the announcement was published.
*Rwanda and Belarus to expand cooperation, 29 July 2026. Rwanda and Belarus have expressed their willingness to further develop relations and cooperation in sectors including trade, agriculture, technology, education and security.
This was revealed on 28 July 2026 when Ambassador Gen Maj Joseph Nzabamwita presented credentials to the President of Belarus, Aleksandr Lukashenko, authorizing him to represent Rwanda in Belarus.
Belarus has an economy based largely on industry, agriculture, technology and trade, and is well known for manufacturing agricultural machinery, industrial equipment and other technological equipment.
Belarus gained independence in 1991 after the collapse of the Soviet Union. It shares borders with other countries including Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Lithuania and Latvia.
President Lukashenko said that Belarus wants to increase economic cooperation with Rwanda, describing it as a foundation for the development of bilateral political relations.
He said, “Belarus wants to expand its relations with Rwanda. We attach special importance to economic cooperation as a foundation for building political relations.”
Lukashenko called for the strengthening of trade between the two countries, and for the establishment of a joint commission that would play a role in promoting cooperation projects in key sectors.
Ambassador Nzabamwita said that he was happy with the new role of representing Rwanda in Belarus, indicating that he would do everything possible to promote Rwanda’s interests and strengthen relations between the two countries.
He said, “It is a great honor to represent my country and its leadership as the non-resident Ambassador to Belarus. I will strive to promote Rwanda’s interests and cooperation between our countries.”
Cooperation between Rwanda and Belarus has been discussed on various occasions, with both countries expressing their willingness to work together in the fields of agriculture, industry, information technology, education and security.
Belarus has also expressed its willingness to assist Rwanda in acquiring agricultural machinery and providing maintenance services.
In August 2025, Ambassador Nzabamwita, who also represents Rwanda in Russia, discussed with the Belarusian Ambassador to Russia, Aleksandr Rogozhnik, how the two countries could further enhance cooperation in these areas.
This step comes as Rwanda continues to expand its relations with various countries around the world, seeking new opportunities in trade, investment and the development of various sectors.
Economy and Tech.
*Construction of Kivu Belt Water Supply System Completed On July 21, 2026, the Ministry of Infrastructure announced that the construction of the Kivu Belt Water Supply System has been completed and has begun supplying water to residents in Bwishyura and Rubengera Sectors in Karongi District.
Mininfra announced that the completion of the plant will help provide clean water to various parts of the Western Province.
The plant has a water treatment capacity of 13,000 cubic meters.
The completed part of the plant is the first phase of the Kivu Belt Water Supply System project that will, when completed, provide clean water to over 130,000 residents.
The message reads: “In addition to providing clean water to households, the project will improve service delivery to health facilities, schools, hotels, commercial centers, and other government institutions, in line with supporting public health and economic development.”
Rwanda says it is committed to providing safe water to Rwandans and ensuring sustainable access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene for all Rwandans.
The Rwandan government recently announced that in a move to address the problem of insufficient clean water reaching the population, 688,000 metric tons of clean water will be processed by 2029.
WASAC indicates that at least 1,234 metric tons of wastewater are processed daily by existing plants but are not available due to aging plants.
Among the efforts being made are the expansion and rehabilitation of infrastructure and water pipes, with the aim of reducing water leakage before it reaches the population to 25% by 2029 from the current 35%.
*The cost of building the Rwanda Nuclear Research Center has been reduced by $300 million, July 22, 2026. The Director General of the Rwanda Atomic Energy Agency, Dr. Fidel Ndahayo, said that the cost of building the Center for Nuclear Science and Technology (CNST) has been reduced from $800 million to $500 million after various analyses.
He reiterated this on July 21, 2026, when members of the IAEA’s Integrated Nuclear Infrastructure Review Mission for Research Reactors (INIR-RR) concluded their visit to Rwanda.
The INIR-RR mission aims to assess Rwanda’s progress in developing infrastructure for research based on nuclear technology.
From July 13 to 21, 2026, IAEA experts conducted an inspection to determine whether Rwanda met the requirements to build a nuclear research and development center.
The Director General of RAEB, Dr. Fidele Ndahayo, said that the inspection was successful because they found that Rwanda met the requirements to build this center.
He said, “They found that we met the requirements in the first phase of building the research center.”
He continued by saying that the second phase that will follow is about signing agreements with other research centers, universities and others to complete it with experts to work there.
He said that once this is completed, the construction of this center will begin because the site has been found, but he did not announce when construction work will begin.
On October 30, 2024, Rwanda approved a study worth $800 million to build this facility, which will be located in the Eastern Province, Bugesera District.
Dr. Ndahayo said that after approving the study, they conducted research and analysis on the construction of this facility and found that it would cost a lot of money, and ended up cutting it by $300 million.
He said, “After discussing and conducting various analyses, looking at similar facilities that have been built, we found that the costs could be reduced to $500 million.”
IAEA Deputy Director General Mikhail Chudakov praised Rwanda for its continued efforts in building infrastructure for research based on nuclear technology.
He said, “Rwanda is showing that it is a country that can build institutions, knowledge and methods to use nuclear energy in different phases. They do this well through partnerships with various institutions that have the capacity and will help the country achieve its goals in just 10 years.”
This center will have what is known as a ‘Research Reactor’, which can be interpreted as a factory that uses nuclear energy, but does not aim to generate electricity but is used for research, training, and the production of equipment used in medicine and industry.
This ‘reactor’ will have the capacity to generate 400 kilowatts of energy. This energy produces radiation that makes research more effective.
This center will also include a section that will be used to process agricultural products, where crops will be processed to increase their shelf life or to find seeds that can withstand the weather.
This center will also include a pharmaceutical factory that will help diagnose and treat many diseases that previously required medical treatment outside the country, and another part of the laboratories that will be used for various activities.
There will also be a section dedicated to training, where those who will receive it will be prepared to work in another center to be built, which will generate electricity from nuclear energy
*UR to invest Rwf4.4 billion awarded by Mastercard Foundation in scholarships, July 22, 2026. The University of Rwanda (UR) announced that it will use the $3 million award from the Mastercard Foundation to enhance the capacity of its medical education, provide scholarships to more students and purchase equipment for its existing laboratory.
The announcement was made by UR’s Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs and Research, Dr. Ndikumana Raymond, after the university was named one of the top five African universities to receive the Africa Higher Education for Transformation (AHEFT) Prize.
The award, presented by the Mastercard Foundation, aims to recognize universities that demonstrate exceptional contributions to advancing education and youth development in Africa.
UR won in the ‘Excellence in Health’ category, for its role in advancing education and capacity in the health sector in Rwanda.
Dr. Ndikumana said that the money will not only be used in the medical field, but will also help publicize the many activities carried out by UR.
He said, “This award will help us to better demonstrate what we do, because it is not only in medicine. We do a lot in agriculture, in construction, in environmental issues and in various other sectors.”
He explained that one of the efforts that will be made in using the money is to increase the capacity of medical schools.
He said, “We are going to invest this money in teaching medical subjects. We have many students but we want to have more. We will provide scholarships and the main goal is to increase the number of students who can study these subjects and study them well, because we will increase laboratory equipment where we did not have it.”
Returning to the reasons why they were awarded the award in the health subjects category, Dr. Ndikumana said that especially since the Genocide against the Tutsi, UR has made a significant contribution to training medical personnel.
In 2013, when various public universities were merged to form the University of Rwanda, Dr. Ndikumana highlighted that this was one of the factors that increased the university's performance and development, allowing it to do many things, including improving the quality of health courses.
He said that last year, more than 1,000 research papers were published, most of which were in the field of medicine, as there were 477.
He stressed that UR's being the first university in Rwanda, especially in the field of medicine, was not something that just happened, as it has educated more than 26,000 people in the field of health, has many departments related to medicine, and has a lot of infrastructure.
The universities that won these awards, which were contested for the first time, will be presented at the International Conference on the Contribution of Universities to Development to be held in Ghana on September 22, 2026, and the awards will continue for 10 years, with a total of $500 million.
*Rwanda to start producing its own lightning rods, 23 July 2026. The Ministry of Emergency Situations (MINEMA) has announced that Rwanda has a plan to start producing its own lightning rods in order to find affordable lightning rods for every Rwandan who needs to have a lightning rod in their home.
The Director General in charge of monitoring disaster-prone areas at MINEMA, Niyotwambaza Christine, made the announcement in Karongi District, on 23 July 2026, during the official handover of powerful lightning rods installed at GS Musango and Musango Power Station.
The power station and the facility are located in Rwankuba Sector, one of the five sectors in Karongi that are often struck by lightning.
Dushimimana John from Rwankuba Sector told IGIHE that Rwankuba is often struck by lightning, killing residents, livestock and electrical equipment.
He said, “I know of more than seven people in Rwankuba Sector who have died after being struck by lightning. The reason is that we don’t have lightning rods in our houses. We don’t know where to buy them, we don’t even know how much they cost.”
The Deputy Mayor of Karongi District, in charge of economic development, Ntakirutimana Julienne, said that the districts most frequently affected by lightning are Rwankuba, Gitesi, Ruganda and Rugabano because they are located in a series of high mountains that make up the Congo-Nile Basin. Lightning strikes are common in high mountains.
The Director General of MINEMA, Niyotwambaza Christine, said that the reason why many residents do not have lightning rods in their houses is because they are expensive.
He said, “Lightning rods are very expensive, you cannot find a lightning rod that costs less than 3 million Rwf.”
Niyotwambaza said that in collaboration with MIMENA, RP Karongi College, the Rwanda Standards Board (RSB), and the National Center for Research, Technology, and Innovation (NCST), they will next week evaluate the lightning rod being manufactured in Rwanda.
He said, “At the national level, we do not have the capacity to certify it, we will export it, if those who have the knowledge and experience to manufacture lightning rods tell us that it has lightning protection capabilities, we will have reached another stage of starting to manufacture it in Rwanda. When we start manufacturing it in Rwanda, we will take another step to find a way to make it cheap so that the citizen can buy it and install it in his house.”
MINEMA figures show that in the past four years, lightning has killed 287 people and left more than 950 permanently disabled.
Mugarura Amiri, who works at the Ottawa Lightning Protection Center in Rwanda, said that installing concrete in houses and wearing plastic shoes reduces the risk of being struck by lightning by 85%.
This innovative lightning protection system installed in Musango was built by the United Nations Office for Migration (IOM) with funding from the Government of Japan.
Takashi Ujikawa, an IOM official who is supporting Rwanda’s lightning protection program, said that the reason they support disaster prevention programs is because they are one of the reasons why people move from their homes to become migrants.
*Modern farming expertise to cost Rwanda $5 million, 24 July 2026. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRI), in collaboration with the Rwanda Agricultural Research Institute (RICA), is involved in a project that will see farmers cultivating 600,000 hectares of land across the country practicing soil conservation agriculture in a project that will cost $5 million.
It is a project that aims to expand and integrate soil conservation agriculture into agricultural extension programs, which began by providing training to various categories of workers in the agricultural sector close to the people.
Those trained will then teach the people how to practice soil conservation agriculture where the project will be implemented for four years.
This project will be implemented in all districts where land consolidation agriculture is practiced, starting with 100,000 hectares in the next cropping season, then 150,000 hectares until 2029, reaching 600,000 hectares.
So far, 168 people have been trained, including district agricultural officers and agricultural extension officers in RAB.
On July 22, another two-day training course began at RICA in Bugesera, which will be given to 52 agricultural interns in all districts.
This is while the total number of people who will be trained in this project is 889 before the start of the 2027 A (Autumn) cropping season.
The Director of Agricultural Extension and Livestock in RICA, Dr. Harelimana Léonce, said that the project aims to create a sustainable agriculture in Rwanda and increase production.
He said, “We want sustainable agriculture to ensure that the land is not bare, so that even our rivers are filled with soil due to erosion. Another is to increase production because the land will have recovered.”
Dr. Harelimana explained that in conventional agriculture, there are some things that people do wrong that damage production, including over-cultivating the field, which makes the soil soft and easily eroded.
There is also the practice of burning the field to remove all the grass residues and using chemical fertilizers at once, which makes the plants unable to use it all and the remaining ones harm the environment, as well as not mulching.
In mixed farming, the soil must be covered, not plowed too much, and the fertilizer must be applied in stages and close to the plants so that it does not die in vain.
In terms of production, the land is taken care of and maintained, for a maize crop grown on good seeds, seven tons can be obtained per hectare, while on unmanaged land, less than two tons per hectare.
For beans, the yield per hectare on managed land ranges from 1.6 tons to more, but on unmanaged land it does not exceed 500 kilograms.
The coordinator of this project at MINAGRI, Dr. Nkurunziza Christian, said that what they want to solve is the problem of land that clearly needs attention in order to continue to produce significant yields.
He said, “Today, the land is not increasing, but we want it to produce as much as possible. If we do not maintain it, it will lose its originality because, as in the past, there were fields, but now this is no longer possible, it requires cultivation every season. There have been efforts such as cutting terraces, but they did not produce enough, so we decided to bring this project.”
Trainee Eric, who is among the trainees working in Ruhango District, said he learned that crop rotation helps reduce crop diseases, and that soil conservation methods reduce the number of wastes in agriculture in general, which is knowledge he is going to share with farmers.
*Harvesting 18 tons of potatoes per hectare: Highlights of the agricultural exhibition in Kigali, 24 July 2026. More than 200 farmers and livestock producers supported by six projects under the Rwanda Agricultural Board-SPIU (RAB-SPIU) are set to showcase their work at the 10-day agricultural exhibition in Kigali.
The annual exhibition is organized by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, and this year it was attended by more than 600 exhibitors, including individuals, companies and groups.
Among those who will be showcasing their work are those supported by six projects operating under RAB, namely SAIP, CDAT, KIWIIP, SAPMP, RDDP and PRISM.
All these projects have worked with farmers or herders to help them improve their practices and the results they have achieved show that their efforts have made positive progress.
Iyakaremye Wenceslas, who is part of the Kowabimuru Cooperative, which grows potatoes in the Karongi and Rutsiro districts, said that they started as self-help groups but later came together to form a cooperative in 2018 when they came across the SAIP project.
This project has helped them to farm better, and they have been able to increase their production from less than seven tons of potatoes per hectare to more than 18 tons per hectare.
In particular, SAIP provided them with six irrigation machines, carts for transporting produce, and equipment for spraying pesticides, among other things, which allowed them to expand their cultivated area from 161 hectares to more than 200 hectares.
He added, “Personally, I have reached a point where I can work with financial institutions. I recently took out a loan of 12 million Frw and I am also growing two or three hectares of my own and getting good yields.”
Uzamukunda Yikunda, who heads an agricultural and livestock cooperative in Muhanga District, said that they started working in 2007 but that they had no tangible activities until they started receiving support from the CDAT project. Now, they have a sugarcane factory and export products abroad, which is further developing them.
Rukera Christine, founder and head of CF Premium, a pepper farming company in Kicukiro District, said that the SAIP project played a major role in this because it helped her make a profit.
She revealed that she used to grow pepper on 22 hectares and produce less than eight tons, but SAIP helped her grow it with irrigation and increased the area she grows to 30 hectares, and now she produces 14 tons per hectare.
Mugisha Eric, head of a fruit growing cooperative in Kayonza District, said that the KIWIIP project was what enabled them to start operations in 2021 and now they have received about 300 million Rwf, and they are now able to export avocados abroad and they are also making progress.
He said, “All the members brought was land, and before they used to grow sorghum and other crops, they earned no more than 200,000 Rwf per hectare, but now they earn about 2 million Rwf in one season.”
These farmers and livestock producers, apart from the obvious attractions they had to exhibit in Kigali, agree that this exhibition helps them find new markets and learn from others and improve their practices.
The Minister of Agriculture and Livestock, Dr. Ndabamenye Telesphore, said that promoting agricultural and livestock activities is very important in building partnerships and collaborations that enable timely solutions to be found.
He said, “This shows that agricultural and livestock production cannot be achieved without innovation or collaboration in solving the problems facing agriculture and livestock in Rwanda.”
The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock indicates that agriculture and livestock constitute about 19% of the country’s gross domestic product, and 70% of industries in Rwanda process agricultural products.
Under the Fifth Five-Year Agricultural Transformation Plan (PSTA5), Rwanda will spend $5.4 billion to develop this sector.
*The government has established a new agency that will manage the Ibirunga and Gishwati-Mukura National Parks, 25 July 2026. The Cabinet meeting approved the establishment of a national agency for the conservation of the Biological Network in the care of wildlife in Rwanda, including the management of the Gishwati-Mukura National Park and the Ibirunga National Park.
It was a decision made in the Cabinet meeting on July 24, 2026, led by President Paul Kagame in Village Urugwiro.
The government of Rwanda explained that this new center will take care of wildlife through ecosystem conservation, research, innovation and building sustainability in environmental care.
He explained that improving the management of National Parks will continue to promote sustainable tourism, protect services based on environmental protection and improve the economy and well-being of the people who live in these parks.
In February 2016, the Gishwati-Mukura forest, located in the Congo-Nile mountain range, was recognized as Rwanda's fourth National Park.
This park is located in Rutsiro and Ngororero Districts in the Western Province of the country, with an area of 3,558 hectares, including the Gishwati area with an area of 1,570 hectares and the Mukura area with an area of 1,988 hectares.
It is home to more than 60 species of trees including table and bamboo. This park is known for housing a variety of animals, including 20 species of chimpanzees, golden monkeys, birds and other small animals.
Volcanoes National Park is also a must-see in this center which is known to be home to the rarest volcanic geese in the world.
Some of them are found in East Africa, especially in Rwanda, Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2010, 480 geese were counted, but in 2019, they reached 604. In the world that year, they reached 1,063.
It is located in the mountain range of Karisimbi, Muhabura, Bisoke and the lake above, Sabyinyo and Gahinga.
Apart from mountain geese, there are more than 200 species of birds and cattle.
Rwanda also has Akagera National Park and Nyungwe National Park, both of which have unique wildlife habitats and attract new tourists every year.
The 2025 activity report of the Rwanda Development Agency, RDB, shows that tourism revenue in 2025 is $685 million, from $647 million in 2024, which represents an increase of 6%.
The number of visitors to Rwanda also increased by 9% to 1.49 million people. Many of these visit Volcanoes National Park, which is popular for its geese, as well as other parks.
Rwanda expects that in 2029, the tourism sector will earn the country $1.1 billion.
Currently, 10% of the revenue generated by each park is distributed to the people who live near the park through providing them with infrastructure and programs aimed at their development.
Social and Health
*What Bill Gates saw at the Mwulire Health Center On July 21, 2026, American financier Bill Gates, founder and Chairman of the Board of the Gates Foundation, visited the health facilities in Rwamagana District, praising the way Rwanda uses medical technology and the way pregnant mothers are monitored.
Bill Gates arrived in Rwamagana District on Monday with the Minister of Health, Dr Sabin Nsanzimana, the Governor of Eastern Province, Pudence Rubingisa, the Mayor of Rwamagana District, Mbonyumuvunyi Radjab and various others.
It is a visit he made with the aim of seeing the progress Rwanda has made in improving health. He visited a factory that manufactures needles that are exported to several African countries, and visited the Mwulire Health Center and met with health advisors.
The director of Mwulire Health Center, Ingabire Mediatrice, told IGIHE that the businessman said that he was first told about the history of Mwulire Health Center, the service it provides and the people who receive it.
He said that they visit the technology that they use to treat them, from the reception point of the patient to the health center, they show him how to enter the technology using the ID, and he is sent to the service that brought him.
He said, "After we showed him the service where we start medication for a person who has already been treated, he was explained how we get the medication from a treated person and how we give it to him. We then went to the laboratory and showed him where we take the tests."
Ingabire went on to say that they took her to a place where pregnant women are examined, it is shown how the child is monitored from the first month where the mother is examined eight times until she gives birth.
He said, "He appreciated how clean our health center is, he appreciated the way we use technology in medicine, every service he went to asked the doctors what is the point of not using paper anymore but using technology for everything. He was happy about it and praised Rwanda for using technology in medicine and how it helps to speed up services.''
Mwulire Health Center started in 2014 as a primary health center and in 2023 many buildings were built so that the primary health center became a health center. Every day they receive at least 90 patients while in a month they have more than 2240 patients from Mwulire Sector.
Bill Gates is shown Rwanda's progress in using AI in healthcare, July 21, 2026. Billionaire Bill Gates, who is in Rwanda on a visit to see the progress made in health promotion activities, visited the National Health Information Center (NHIC), where he was shown how the data collected continues to improve the healthcare sector across the country.
Bill Gates visited the center on July 21, 2026, and was received by the Minister of Health, Dr. Nsanzimana Sabin and the Minister of Technology and Innovation, Ingabire Paula, who showed him how data is collected in the health sector from the village level and while continuing to improve the healthcare sector across the country.
Since the center was launched last year, it has brought together all the country's health-related data, helping to transform health policies into practical actions to deliver the necessary results and quickly.
Bill Gates was shown how this technology has reduced the time patients spent waiting in lines to receive medical services.
This technology helps to manage and track emergency medical services dispatched to health emergencies in a timely manner.
Among other things, this technology has strengthened the ability to monitor and prevent epidemics.
NHIC's partnership with the Gates Foundation will further enable this institution to continue to expand its operations and capabilities in providing early warning information on epidemics, on issues that require urgent attention and prevent health problems before they escalate.
Other benefits include the effective use of modern technology and the integration of information at the national level of health.
Bill Gates has been in Rwanda since July 20, 2026, on a visit aimed at reviewing the progress made in health promotion activities.
He first visited a syringe factory located in Rwamagana District. He visited the Mwulire Health Center and one of the health consultants to understand the functioning of the health sector from the village level.
The projects Gates visited in Rwanda are among those that the Gates Foundation, of which he is the Chairman of the Board, already supports.
*AI to be used in the treatment of pregnant mothers in Rwanda, 22 July 2026. The Ministry of Health has launched the use of ‘Telemedicine’ technology that uses artificial intelligence ‘AI’ in order to reduce maternal and newborn deaths and improve medical services.
On July 21, 2026, this technology was launched at Nemba Hospital located in Gakenke District and is expected to be extended to different parts of the country.
This technology will be used when a pregnant mother has a problem that may require her to go to a higher hospital for treatment.
In this case, the obstetrician treating her will use this ‘Telemedicine’ technology to communicate with a specialist doctor to explain the patient’s problem and then tell him how to care for him without requiring the patient to be referred to other hospitals.
A doctor at Nemba Hospital, Uwacu Mudusa Ghislain, explained how the technology works and what it will help them with.
He said, “I will wear a ‘camera’ so that I can tell it what I want to do and it will do it. This ‘camera’ will connect with a specialist doctor at the Ministry of Health so that he can help me with any problems I may have while treating a patient.” It will help us reduce the number of patients being referred to hospitals in Kigali to seek specialists.”
Ingabire Josiane told RBA that she went to the hospital with a stomach problem and they gave her basic treatment but it did not help and she continued to suffer. Later, with the help of this new method, she recovered.
He said, “They spoke to the specialists using technology and they helped me recover from my stomach. We are grateful to the Rwandan government for promoting technology because people get fast services and because we are treated by specialists, we trust that they are helping us.”
The Ministry of Health says the technology will be deployed in hospitals with high rates of maternal and neonatal mortality.
In Rwanda, statistics show that the hospital birth rate is 95%, maternal mortality is 203 per 100,000 women, and neonatal mortality is 19 per 1,000 children, under-five mortality is 45 per 1,000 children, and infant mortality is 33 per 1,000 live births.
*Ruti Joel helped Rwandans living in Indonesia to celebrate 32 years since the liberation of Rwanda, 22 July 2026. Rwandans living in Indonesia celebrated 32 years since the liberation of Rwanda, showing how culture can also be a bridge that strengthens relations between countries.
It is a ceremony marked by various activities that took place from 17 to 18 July 2026 in Jakarta.
It was attended by representatives of the Government of Indonesia, representatives of their countries in this country, international organizations, Rwandans living in Indonesia and friends of Rwanda.
Today was celebrated on the theme of showing how Rwanda's progress in development continues.
It has been pointed out that liberation is a great day in the history of Rwanda that shows the journey to rebuild the country after the Genocide against the Tutsis in 1994 that left it in shambles.
The participants of this event were also shown that the celebration of Rwanda's liberation day reflects the integrity of Rwandans, strengthening unity and reconciliation and the country's efforts to build a better future based on peace and development.
The Ambassador of Rwanda to Indonesia, Sheikh Abdul Karim Harelimana, said that what Rwanda has achieved today is based on visionary management, the loyalty of Rwandans and the common will to rebuild the country.
He pointed out how Rwanda is now recognized internationally due to the progress it has made in good governance, security, equality, innovation, environmental protection, health, education and economic development.
He said, "It reminds us that liberating the country is not a historical event, but an ongoing responsibility. Rwanda's journey continues through unity, loyalty and trust as we continue to strive to build a better future for our descendants."
Santo Darmosumarto, the Director General for Africa and Asia Pacific in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, who represented the Government of Indonesia in this event, said that Rwanda's trip was a lesson for many countries including Indonesia, because of the strength of unity and willingness to rebuild the country.
He said: "On behalf of the Government and the people of Indonesia, I express the respect and solidarity we owe to Rwandans. The extraordinary journey of Rwanda has given many countries the strength to believe in the ability of unity and reconstruction. Peace, reconciliation and development must go hand in hand."
In this song, Ruti Joel expressed the uniqueness of Nyarwanda culture through his songs and conveyed it to the youth through modern methods.
This show was one of the activities aimed at using culture as a diplomatic process, with the aim of introducing the values ​​of Rwanda, its uniqueness and its cultural heritage to the people of Indonesia.
Ruti Joel's show also helped people to have fun and socialize, where the guests joined the Rwandan Ambassador in song and dance.
Gilang Syahbani, who is in charge of Communication and Technology at the Embassy of Rwanda in Indonesia, said that this event showed how culture can be a bridge that connects countries and strengthens friendship between them.
He said, "Ruti Joel's participation in the Independence Day celebration in Jakarta is an important step in Rwanda's cultural diplomacy in Indonesia. Seeing guests dancing with Ruti Joel and the Rwandan Ambassador showed that culture is a common language that can connect people, especially two countries that value art and culture."
Ruti Joel also said that he was very happy to participate in the celebration of 32 years since the liberation of Rwanda in Jakarta, asking people to love and protect their culture.
He said, “I am very happy to be a part of this special ceremony. My message to Rwandans and youth everywhere is to love and be proud of their culture, because culture is an important part of our identity. Through music, technology and culture, we can show the world our culture.”
Through this activity, the Embassy of Rwanda in Indonesia said that it would like to further strengthen the relationship between Rwanda and Indonesia, not only based on diplomacy and development cooperation, but also based on people-to-people relations based on culture.
The relationship between Rwanda and Indonesia has been successful and in June 2024 Rwanda opened its embassy in Jakarta.
The two countries also signed a bilateral cooperation agreement to share political experience and visa waiver for diplomats and service passport holders.
In 2022, President Paul Kagame visited Indonesia where he participated in the G20 Summit.
The head of their countryHe and his Indonesian counterpart discussed the future of bilateral cooperation and how to strengthen diplomatic relations between Rwanda and Indonesia.
*July saw above-normal temperatures in Rwanda, 24 July 2026. Rwanda's temperatures in the second half of July 2026 were above normal, with temperatures exceeding the average for that period.
A report by the National Meteorological Institute (Meteo Rwanda) for farmers and ranchers indicates that from 11 to 20 July 2026, temperatures were above normal compared to the past 30 years.
The Meteo Rwanda report indicates that during those ten days, rainfall was higher in many parts of the country compared to the average rainfall for those dates over the past several years.
However, there were areas where rainfall decreased, including most of Kigali City, some parts of the Southern and Northern Provinces, as well as the districts of Kayonza, Nyagatare and Nyamasheke.
Meteo Rwanda said that where rainfall was observed, it fell for between one and five days. The heaviest rainfall was observed in some parts of the districts of Nyamasheke, Nyaruguru, Musanze and Nyabihu.
At the Busogo ISAE station in Musanze District, 40.9 millimeters of rain were measured, falling in two days. According to Ntendezi in Nyamasheke District, 37.7 millimeters were measured, falling in five days, while according to Kibeho in Nyaruguru District, 31.2 millimeters were measured, falling in one day.
During that period, some parts of Kigali City, Eastern Province, Southern Province and Northern Province did not receive rain.
Temperatures above normal
Meteo Rwanda indicated that in many parts of the country, temperatures were above the normal average between July 11 and 20.
The lowest temperature was recorded at Kinigi in Musanze District, where it was 20.7°C. The highest temperature was recorded at Bugarama in Rusizi District, where it reached 32.1°C.
In general, Meteo Rwanda said that Rusizi District, especially the Bugarama Valley, recorded the highest temperature in the country during that period.
The report also shows that the minimum temperature in most parts of the country was above the average minimum temperature observed between July 11 and 20.
The lowest temperature was recorded at Busogo in Musanze District, where it was 12°C, while the highest temperature was recorded at Bugarama in Rusizi District, where it was 19.9°C.
Meteo Rwanda indicated that Musanze, Burera and Nyabihu Districts were the coldest areas in the country during that period.
Meteo Rwanda advised farmers to continue to consult with their local agricultural advisors and carry out activities related to the C growing season, including planting in swamps and irrigating where possible.
Farmers were also asked to prepare for the 2027 A season, while livestock farmers were asked to contact veterinarians for advice on how to care for their livestock based on the expected weather and summer conditions.
Meteo Rwanda urged the population to continue monitoring weather forecast information and use it in planning agricultural and livestock activities.
*360,000 families appeal to the Mutual Fund contribution authorities, 26 July 2026. The Director of the Department of Social Welfare in the Ministry of Local Government, Kayigana Godfrey, said that there is a problem that has not been resolved by the financial institution that determines the Mutual Fund contribution that they must pay, with more than 360,000 people appealing.
He said this in an interview on Royal FM that was about the new mutual health insurance contributions that came into effect in the 2026/27 financial year.
The inclusion of residents in the financial institutions is done using the MINALOC Social Security System. However, when it began to be used to determine the Mutual Fund contribution that members will pay, it was discovered that there were errors.
Kayigana said, "When you start something, mistakes are inevitable. The fact that more than 360,000 households have already appealed means that there are problems with this technology. All of this will help MINALOC and RSSB to improve it so that in the coming years everyone is in the category they deserve to be in."
Of the 360,000 households that appealed, about 340,000 have already been answered.
The director explained that the information entered into the Social System website is based on a person's social information, especially their activities and income, but that more can be added.
He said that in the next three years, this system, which is still in its first year, will contain a lot of personal information, including money flowing through their accounts and their phone.
In general, the new contributions paid are divided into five categories based on the level of the population's finances. Among these institutions, there are three where residents pay the entire contribution themselves, while those in the other two are subsidized by the government.
The Director of Mobilization and Registration of Mutual Insurance Members at the National Social Security Board (RSSB), Ntigurirwa Deogratias, announced that Rwandans are paying contributions to the mutual health insurance, which has decreased by 12% this year compared to the previous year.
He indicated that since the beginning of this year, they have received contributions equivalent to 51% of all those who are required to pay and that they have put a lot of effort into mobilization, although it has not yet yielded sufficient results.
He said that the reason is that there is still a problem of residents who still have the attitude of being hesitant in paying the increased Mutual Insurance contribution, even though some of them are capable of it.
He said, "Many people were used to giving 3,000 Frw, and those who gave 7,000 Frw were few. So telling someone who used to give 3,000 Frw that today they should give 8,000 Frw, even if they have the means, is somewhat difficult and requires a lot of explaining. Today we are at 51%, and last year at this time we were at 63%. This means that there is a gap between where we were last year and where we are today."
*Ebola outbreak in DRC: Cases surpass 3,200, deaths reach 1,405, 27 July 2026. The Ebola outbreak continues to escalate in the Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC, where as of 25 July 2026, 3,200 people had been infected, while 1,405 had died.
Ministry of Health figures show that 773 patients are in isolation or hospitalized, while 571 have recovered. The mortality rate from the epidemic has reached 43.9%, while people who came into contact with infected people are being followed up at a rate of 77.8%.
The Ministry of Health in the DRC says that Ebola response measures are being stepped up in the five provinces where the outbreak has been detected: Ituri, Haut-Uélé, North Kivu, South Kivu and Tshopo.
Doctors and other health workers are continuing to identify those with symptoms, test suspected cases, treat patients and trace contacts.
Ituri remains the hardest hit. In this province, the number of teams monitoring the outbreak, laboratory capacity and clinics have been increased.
In Ituri, a campaign is also being carried out to explain the seriousness of Ebola to the population, monitor those entering and leaving the affected areas and provide equipment to workers who will be dealing with the outbreak.
The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that as of July 15, Ituri had accounted for nearly 90% of the total number of cases, mainly in Bunia, Mongbwalu, Nizi and Nyankunde.
The Ebola outbreak is caused by a strain of the virus known as Bundibugyo. The outbreak, which was declared in Ituri on May 15, 2026, is the 17th to hit the DRC since the Ebola virus was first identified in 1976.
On May 17, the WHO declared the outbreak a public health emergency of international concern, requiring international cooperation to contain it.
The WHO had reported that on July 15, the DRC had 2,124 Ebola cases and 828 deaths. In the following 10 days, the number of infected people increased by 1,076, and the number of deaths increased by 577.
The fight against the epidemic remains difficult due to challenges including insecurity, population displacement, and people refusing to go to health facilities, choosing to get sick at home.
There is currently no approved vaccine or specific treatment for the Bundibugyo Ebola, but trials of drugs containing MBP134 and remdesivir have begun in the DRC, which are expected to reduce deaths and the severity of the epidemic.
Justice and Rights
*Gen Tshiwewe asked to be released on parole because he kept important secrets, 21 July 2026, Gen Christian Tshiwewe Songesha, who was the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, asked the military court to release him temporarily because he kept important secrets.
This soldier, who was also the head of the army in charge of protecting senior officials and adviser to President Félix Tshisekedi on military affairs, was arrested on July 9, 2025.
He is accused of crimes including treason, encouraging soldiers to commit illegal acts and illegal possession of weapons. It is all related to the plan to remove Tshisekedi's regime.
Gen Tshiwewe is competing with others including Maj Gen Maurice Nyembo, Brig Gen John Ngoy Kabila, Brig Gen John Sangwa Muhemedi, Col Guy Mukombozi Zahinda, Col Pathy Sangwa Lumbu and Col Christophe Tshibangu Kenge.
Gen John Numbi who headed the RDC Police and the Inspector General of the country's military and Brig Gen Chinyabuuma Pascal Kamukinde and civilian Pascal Nyembo were also among the defendants in this case but they escaped.
After the commencement of their trial on June 4, 2026, where the court examined their profiles, Gen Tshiwewe used his lawyer, Me Parfait Kanyanga, to request their release.
On July 21, Me Kanyanga pointed out that Gen Tshiwewe has been released on bail, he cannot escape justice, so the court should not be worried.
Mr. Kanyanga also said that in relation to the fact that his client has done important work in the military, the Ndolo military prison where he is being held is not the place he should be because he is keeping important secrets.
This lawyer pointed out that the way Gen Tshiwewe was prosecuted was against the law, because he was not subjected to a preliminary investigation after his arrest.
He explained that there were no concrete reasons to show that Gen Tshiwewe may have committed the crimes he is accused of, so that they would have been based on sending him to Ndolo prison.
Others in this file who were detained in Ndolo military prison also pointed out that the way they were prosecuted was against the law, they asked the military court to release them on bail, and they tried them outside.
*Specials in the case of Rwamucyo: Mr. Karongozi spoke about the protests and trying to speed up the lawyers of the plaintiffs for compensation. Eugène Rwamucyo complicity in the crime of Genocide and other crimes against humanity, sentenced to 27 years in prison.
This decision confirms the one that was taken on October 30, 2024. The Rwamucyo appeal case was decided for more than a month, from June 8, 2026 to the night of July 17, 2026.
In the appeal he was defended by new lawyers (in the first class in 2024 he had two) seven including Mr. Jean Baptiste Harelimana from Rwanda who knows Butare well as he said in the trial: he studied high school in the small seminary of Butare.
The Rwamucyo crimes were confirmed to have been committed in parts of the former Butare Prefecture including the municipalities of Ngoma, Gishamvu, Ndora and Huye.
At that time he was the Director of the Center universitaire de Santé Publique (CUSP) of the former University of Rwanda (UNR) which was responsible for public health. During the Genocide, he was also involved in temporarily managing the Butare Prefecture Sanitary Region because at that time there was no director.
Mr. André Martin Karongozi, who is defending the plaintiffs in the Rwamucyo case, in an interview with IGIHE, said that this case was characterized by unusual actions that targeted the plaintiffs as well as the RPF.
This lawyer explained that the trial has reached the middle, on the first day the survivors from Rwanda testified, the members of the family group called 'Baho' surprised the court.
According to Me Karongozi, on the first day, the survivors had taken a flight to Paris to testify. While the first (Mr. Karongozi who is defending) had already testified and was waiting to be questioned "We are going to see people stand up on that side where Rwamucyo's family and his supporters are sitting, two with flags, one wearing a black mask, shouting Kagame..."
Mr. Karongozi went on to explain that the gendarmes immediately arrested the President of the court and asked them to be released. It was also necessary for the President to immediately request a temporary suspension of the trial so that the security guards would know the situation and the witness could continue to be questioned.
As part of the investigation, these people were also videotaped.
Mr. Karongozi said that the protest seriously disturbed the person he was defending as well as other survivors of the Genocide against the Tutsi who were in that courtroom.
That night the person who testified did not give up, the next day in the morning it was necessary to call an ambulance. Nyama was relieved and returned to Rwanda.
For Mr. Karongozi, the fact that the survivors of the Genocide against the Tutsi came to testify on the first day and that this was done, shows that it was something that was planned in advance. As it was also seen, those who participated in this case in support of Rwamucyo provided news every day, deliberately distorting it in order to hinder the lawyers defending the claimants, and they did not show the Prosecutor who sued Rwamucyo using social media.
Mr. Karongozi said that when the trial was coming to an end, there were those who fabricated that he had gone to see Rwamucyo secretly and accused him of lies, that he had denied the RPF and other lies they had made up.
They also attacked Mr. Richard Gisagara and Michel Laval, not even the prosecutor.
He explained that as the news spread around, Rwamucyo's supporters had planned to go to court in the number of 200 to put pressure on the court.
That was evident in the video shown by Chaste Gahunde on Wednesday, July 15. For this reason, it was necessary that from Thursday (July 16) the security guards were instructed to take measures to strengthen security. The surprising thing in this case, as Me Karongozi said, is that Rwamucyo is the Rwandan who was prosecuted for his involvement in the Genocide against the Tutsis in Rwanda, who was accompanied by many people who supported him in court and that there may be those involved in the Genocide.
He said that Dr. Rwamucyo appealed to witnesses who deny and denigrate the Genocide against the Tutsis, including journalist Patrick Mbeko from the Democratic Republic of Congo, General Augustin Ndindiliyimana who led the Rwandan gendarmerie and Hervé Deguine, who agreed with Pierre Péan on what he wrote (in his book Noires fureurs, blancs menteurs) that Tutsis are infected with lies when they are born, Hutus who live with them also acquire these habits.
Mr. Karongozi said that in this case, Rwamucyo told the court that the prison was not comfortable for him.
Me Karongozi said that this pain made Rwamucyo to say in front of the court that he bowed to those who were killed during the Genocide, and that he felt the pain of the survivors.
For Me Karongozi, it seems that he said this with the intention of defeating the court so that it will be easier for him, he will be released from prison or he will have a reduced sentence.
*Major Ntabakuze, who recently appeared for questioning, again requested his early release, 22 July 2026. Major Aloys Ntabakuze, who was the Commander of a commando battalion in the defeated Rwandan Armed Forces (Ex-FAR), has again requested the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT) for his early release.
The soldier submitted this request on 29 June 2026 after the President of the IRMCT, Graciela Gatti Santana, rejected his previous request on the grounds that the request exceeded the word limit on 26 June.
The IRMCT states that a request should not exceed 3000 words, but on 22 June, Ntabakuze's lawyer, Me Sandrine Gaillot, had written 4636 words. Graciela allowed him to submit another request that complied with the guidelines.
After Maj Ntabakuze and his lawyer requested that the second request be kept confidential, on July 21, Graciela reminded them that all events at the IRMCT must be public unless special reasons are shown for confidentiality.
The judge noted that a convicted person represented by a lawyer, when requesting early release, must submit a document addressed to this institution along with another document containing the information to be disclosed.
Graciela explained that Maj Ntabakuze was reminded that he must submit another document containing the information to be disclosed but that he did not comply.
The judge asked Maj Ntabakuze to prepare another document containing the information to be disclosed and submit it within 14 days so that his request can be considered.
Maj Ntabakuze was the commander of the Ex-FAR para-commando battalion from June 1988 to July 1994.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) had convicted him of ordering para-commandos to kill Tutsis on Nyanza Hill in Kicukiro on 11 April 1994 and at the former IAMSEA college in Remera on 15 April 1994.
The former IAMSEA (African and Mauritian Institute of Statistics and Economics) was the site of the KIE after the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi, which later became a department of the University of Rwanda.
The ICTR Trial Chamber convicted Maj Ntabakuze of genocide, extermination and persecution as crimes against humanity and sentenced him to life imprisonment, but he appealed and was sentenced to 35 years in prison on 8 May 2012.
After his conviction, Maj Ntabakuze was transferred to a prison in Benin under an extradition agreement between that country and the United Nations.
Maj Ntabakuze is requesting early release on the grounds that he has served two-thirds of his sentence, a percentage determined by the IRMCT.
*Mathayo Ngirumpatse, sentenced to life imprisonment, requested release on 23 July 2026. Mathayo Ngirumpatse, who was convicted of genocide and crimes against humanity and sentenced to life imprisonment, requested the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT) to release him on grounds of ill health and retirement.
Ngirumpatse was the President of the MRND party that ruled Rwanda from 1975 to 1994. After the death of Juvenal Habyarimana, he played a key role in establishing the Interim Government that implemented the Genocide against the Tutsi, led by Théodore Sindikubwabo.
The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) convicted Ngirumpatse of participating in the planning of the Genocide, inciting the Interahamwe to commit Genocide, and inciting the Inrerahamwe to rape Tutsi women and girls, and sentenced him to life imprisonment on 2 February 2012.
Judge Denis Bryon, who presided over the trial, stated that based on the gravity of the crimes Ngirumpatse was convicted of and the manner in which they were committed, the entire panel of judges found him to be worthy of life imprisonment.
Ngirumpatse was not satisfied with this verdict. He appealed, requesting an acquittal, but on 29 September 2014, the ICTR Appeals Chamber upheld the charges against him in the original trial, upholding his life sentence.
In December 2017, Ngirumpatse, who was being held in Arusha at the ICTR, was transferred to Sébikhotane prison in Senegal to serve the rest of his life sentence.
On July 23, 2026, Ngirumpatse's lawyer, Me Frédéric Weyl, wrote to the President of the IRMCT, Graciela Gatti Santana, asking her to either release his client from prison or release him early.
Me Weyl indicated that since 1999, his client, who had been in detention for a year, had begun to suffer from health problems including worsening diabetes, Hepatitis C, high blood pressure, stroke and eye disease.
The lawyer explained to Graciela that due to the stroke, Ngirumpatse cannot stand for long periods of time, so in order to avoid falling down, as happened four times while he was in the shower, he walks with a cane.
He said, "He can no longer bathe himself. Since his stroke, a fellow prisoner has brought him water, cleaned his cell, changed his bedding, and managed to do simple things including washing his clothes. This problem has been going on for over a year."
Ngirumpatse says that since Senegal has decided not to imprison people over 70 years of age, even if they are in good health, he also believes that he should be released because he is 86 years old.
Among the reasons that the IRMCT bases its early release on those it has imprisoned, include that they have completed two-thirds of their sentence. For those sentenced to life imprisonment, this is equivalent to 45 years.
Me Weyl believes that based on this principle, Ngirumpatse should wait to apply for release on June 4, 2028, when he will have served 30 years in prison, at the age of 89. He says that it would be difficult for him to be alive at that time and still be living the life he has been living.
Ngirumpatse points out that the principle of completing two-thirds of a sentence regardless of age makes the sentence a death sentence.
The lawyer requested that Senegalese law be considered, because if a prisoner behaves well in prison, 25 years is considered two-thirds of a life sentence, as each year is reduced by three months.
Although Ngirumpatse is requesting release, he continues to maintain his innocence, even though he respects the conclusion of his trial in the ICTR Appeals Chamber. He says that he was convicted solely for having been President of the MRND.
In 2024, Ngirumpatse had also requested the IRMCT to release him early, but this body rejected it because he had not served 30 years, which is considered two-thirds of a life sentence.
*RCS leaders discuss how prisoners can return home with confidence and the ability to avoid crime, 23 July 2026. RCS Commissioner General, CG Evaritse Murenzi, inaugurated a three-day retreat for staff of the Rwanda Correctional Service, RCS. The retreat was attended by a large number of RCS executive board members who also formed the decision-making council.
The retreat is being held at the Gako Military Academy in Bugesera District.
The retreat, which began on 23 July, saw RCS staff and invited partners learn together about the progress of the Rwanda Correctional Service in implementing its core mission of rehabilitating offenders who are punished by the courts, and preparing them to return to Rwandan society as productive members of their families and Rwandan society at large.
CG Evariste Murenzi, opening the retreat, reminded the staff of their own responsibilities and those of RCS, including that RCS has a strong responsibility to reform through prison management and providing quality services, protecting the rights of prisoners, and preparing them well to return to normal life with confidence and the ability to prevent crime and contribute to the development of the country.
He affirmed that RCS has a responsibility to change the mindset and behavior of prisoners, to train them in nation-building values, and to help them rebuild themselves in a proper manner. All these responsibilities are aimed at building a new citizen, with values, knowledge and proper behavior, so that the country has lasting security.
CG Murenzi reminded the participants of this retreat that in order to fulfill these responsibilities, they are required to be professional in everything they do and to work together, each one knowing their responsibilities. He said that this retreat is a solution because RCS staff and its stakeholders will share ideas aimed at developing it so that it reaches the level they desire.
He said, “To accomplish these important tasks, we need to work together, plan for what is needed and take joint measures to improve our responsibilities, each with a clear understanding of their contribution.”
“This retreat comes as one of the solutions, where RCS staff in collaboration with experienced partners will provide discussions on topics including various national policies, technology, security management, public financial management, productivity, mental health, and corrections with the aim of increasing our knowledge and skills that will help us achieve the RCS we desire.”
The three-day retreat, which is comprised of leaders of various farms from across the country, heads of various departments in RCS and others from the Rwanda Revenue Authority Headquarters, is scheduled to be concluded by the Minister of Internal Security, Dr. Vincent Biruta, on July 25 this year.
*Writing that Bukavu is among the prisoners of Benjamin Babunga in Burundi, July 25, 2026. A Congolese known for analyzing the history of the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Great Lakes region in general, Benjamin Babunga, is still imprisoned in Burundi since May 27, 2026 when he was arrested in Bujumbura.
Babunga was arrested while working for a Dutch non-governmental organization called ZAO, which was responsible for monitoring its projects in Burundi and other countries in the region.
The Burundian government accuses him of crimes including terrorism, treason and endangering national security. He denies the allegations, saying his social media posts are within his right to free speech.
In the first hearing that took place in the High Court of Mukaza on July 13, the Burundi Prosecutor's Office presented the records of the messages he published on social media as evidence.
His lawyers said that none of the posts he posted on social media contained threats, criminal activities or hints of foreign nationalism.
The lawyers said their client was being prosecuted for his comments and discussions on social media, rather than for his criminal activities.
Among the documents that caused controversy in the court was the one he put on X on May 11, 2026, where he mentioned that the city of Bukavu in South Kivu Province is cleaner than it was before it was captured by the AFC/M23 coalition in February 2025.
Babunga's message also said that today's Bukavu is calm and everything is in order, rules and regulations are respected, so this good should continue for a long time.
Another controversial document is the one on May 25 about the drone attack on the Kisangani airport. At that time, he said that the fact that AFC/M23 was able to reach this place where there is a strong base of the RDC forces is a sign of a major change in the war.
The Burundian Prosecutor's Office interpreted this message as an expression of support for the AFC/M23; the coalition considers Burundi as a very strong enemy that it joins forces with the RDC in fighting it.
The Burundian authorities also analyzed Babunga's relationship with some of the suspected supporters of AFC/M23 such as journalist Rodriguez Katsuva, questioned him, and looked at the conversations they had.
The names of journalist Steve Wembi and Adrien Kimanuka were also mentioned among the people Babunga is accused of having a private relationship with.
Members of Babunga's family said that the talks he had with Kimanuka about the success of AFC/M23 were only for delay, so they have nothing to do with political activities.
When he was arrested, his phone and computer were seized. His family says that the intelligence agencies in Burundi have lost evidence that he is working with the leaders of AFC/M23 or those in the state of Rwamda.
His lawyers insist that he is not a politician, but an aid worker and historical commentator.
In order to refute allegations that he has a special relationship with Rwanda, his lawyers showed a document he published in 2020 about the massacre in Kasika, where he criticized the country's army accused of being involved.
At that time, Vincent Karega, who was the Ambassador of Rwanda to the RDC, condemned Wembi's message, stating that it was a propaganda campaign.
On July 15, the court ordered that Babunga be released on bail only and was not released because the Prosecution had not commented on this decision.
On July 6, President Evariste Ndayishimiye of Burundi hosted politicians who are opposed to the RDC regime to discuss the bad atmosphere that was still prevailing in Kinshasa.
Although what took them to Burundi was mainly to discuss the Tshisekedi government's plan to change the Constitution, they also told Ndayizimye that Babunga should be released but he was in the air.
Security and Humanitarian Affairs
*President Touadéra awards medals to Rwandan soldiers July 22, 2026, the President of the Central African Republic, Faustin Archange Touadéra, awarded medals of commendation to Rwandan soldiers of the RWANBATT-15 team, after completing a year in the United Nations peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic.
The awarding ceremony took place at the Presidential Palace in Bangui, on July 21, 2026. It was attended by senior officials in the Central African Government, the Rwandan Ambassador to the Central African Republic, Olivier Kayumba, senior military officials, and Rwandans living in the country.
The Rwandan Ministry of Defense announced that the medals were awarded to these soldiers in recognition of their dedication, professionalism, and successful fulfillment of their duties while serving in the MINUSCA mission in the Central African Republic.
During their time on the mission, RWANBATT-15 soldiers played a significant role in protecting civilians and promoting peace, security and stability in the Central African Republic.
The award, known as the Presidential Medal of Appreciation, is a token of appreciation from President Touadéra for the work Rwandan soldiers have done in peacekeeping operations and assisting the people of the Central African Republic.
The Commander of the 15th Battalion, Lt Col Paul Gasasira, thanked the President of the Central African Republic for the continued support he has given to the Battalion in carrying out its missions. He also praised the professionalism, good conduct and dedication of the RWANBATT-15 soldiers throughout their time on the mission.
Rwanda has been collaborating with the United Nations in peacekeeping operations in the Central African Republic for years, through the mission called MINUSCA (United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic) to help restore peace, security and stability in the country.
*AFC/M23 has more than 9,300 new commandos, 22 July 2026. The AFC/M23 coalition fighting the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo announced that it has gained 9,318 new commandos who have been training for many months at the Tchanzu military camp in North Kivu Province.
The ceremony to induct the commandos into AFC/M23 was led by senior leaders of the coalition at the military level, including its Commander-in-Chief, Gen Maj Sultani Makenga, on 20 July 2026.
Gen Maj Makenga announced that the DRC government is killing civilians, in collaboration with armed groups including Burundi, the FDLR terrorist group and the Wazalendo coalition, and the AFC/M23 is fighting to stop this killing.
He asked the new commandos who joined the AFC/M23 to join their comrades on the battlefield to defend the people and restore peace and security so that those who fled can return to their homes; and to prosper.
This fighter explained to the commandos that their operations must be different from that of the DRC army, which is accustomed to stealing, raping and killing innocent citizens, and that they must have good morals.
Gen Maj Makenga said, “Let us start with our relatives, let us start with our country, let us start with our family. If you do that, it will make you proud because you will be liberating your country, liberating your brothers, liberating the Congolese in general.”
He explained to them that the main goal of the AFC/M23 is to remove bad government and replace it with good, and that to achieve this, they must have good morals, respect themselves and the people.
In September 2025, the AFC/M23 also gained 7,437 new commandos and another 9,350 joined in October of that year. These included former civilians, former DRC soldiers, and Wazalendo who agreed to join this forum.
*It's the first time in two hours that I haven't seen anyone with a gun - A Rwandan returning from the DRC, 22 July 2026. 108 Rwandans, including those who had been in the Democratic Republic of Congo for over 32 years, returned through the Rusizi I border. Habarurema Theophile, who was among those who returned, said that he arrived in Rwanda and found it peaceful because they were being harassed by armed groups there.
The Rwandans who were welcomed included 11 men, 27 women and 70 children.
Habarurema Theophile, who returned from the DRC, told RBA that since 1994 he has continued to stay in this country because if he returns he will be killed or mistreated.
He said that the FDLR and some elders who have similar views have always persuaded them that they should not return.
He said, “It was bad, especially since they hated us because we didn’t speak the same language and persecuted us. Then the Wazalendo regime came and they treated us even worse…and to make the decision to return home, I spoke to one Kinangufu and told him about my district of origin and he told me that they heard on the radio that there was no problem and I immediately made plans to return home.”
The man said that he saw Rwanda very differently from the DRC because in the 32 years he had been there, it was the first time in two hours that he had not seen a fighter with a gun.
He said, “You don’t live in a country with guns and say you are safe when you are not a gunman. I am curious to go to where I came from and see if it is the same there as it is here.”
He said that none of his children have been able to go to school but he is ready to start them.
The mayor of Rusizi District, Sindayiheba Phanuel, said that they were grateful for their decision to return to Rwanda.
He said, “We congratulate them for making the right decision to return to their homeland, especially since there are many children who were not born in this country, who were born in exile and do not know Rwanda. It is a great opportunity for them to grow up in a country like Rwanda.”
Mayor Sindayiheba said that there was false information these residents were given about Rwanda, telling them that if they returned they would be killed, that there was no security, but that the information they were told by their friends who returned made them decide to return and they found it to be safe.
He said that the administration is assisting those who returned with health issues, returning to their families, helping children return to school, and so on.
*Rwanda receives over 400 hostages held by FDLR, 23 July 2026. On 22 July 2026, Rwanda received 421 Rwandans who were held hostage by the FDLR terrorist group operating in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.
The Rwandans who returned were received at the Grande Barrière border in Rubavu District, including 43 men, 115 women and 263 children from 136 families.
Mwemezi Dusabe, who is among the Rwandans who returned from Kanyabayonga, said that her husband was killed by five children, and she managed to bring back four children who survived the war.
Ndayambaje Sebutozi, who returned from the Rutongo area, in Rutshuru Territory, said that he fled in 1998, but finding a way to return was a problem because the FDLR knew that anyone who wanted to return was killed.
Sebutozi says that since M23 captured Rutshuru, security has returned, which is why he decided to return home.
He also confirmed that he arrived in Rwanda and found it peaceful because he was well received and that he asked his comrades who remained in the forests of the DRC to return home.
The mayor of Rubavu District, Mulindwa Prosper, said that Rwandans who were held hostage by the FDLR will be given all the necessary documents, and will even get the opportunities they did not have.
He said, "We thank them for being explained and knowing the truth, and being able to free themselves from the shackles that prevented them from returning. They will continue to receive assistance like other Rwandans based on Rwanda's policy of changing the welfare of the population. There are programs to help people get out of poverty like Girinka and other opportunities that will be linked to it."
What they will receive includes basic money to help them start their lives, with returnees over the age of 18 receiving $188, those under 18 receiving $113, and each person receiving basic food worth 45,000 Rwf.
*Gen Maj Alex Kagame lauds China’s role in enhancing RDF capabilities, 23 July 2026. The Chief of Defence Staff, Gen Maj Alex Kagame, has lauded Rwanda’s military cooperation with China, saying it has played a significant role in enhancing the capabilities and professionalism of the Rwanda Defence Forces (RDF).
He reiterated this on the evening of 22 July 2026, at a ceremony organized by the Chinese Embassy in Rwanda to celebrate the 99th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA).
At the ceremony, which was attended by security officials, diplomats and other guests, Gen Maj Alex Kagame represented the Chief of Defence Staff, Gen Mubarakh Muganga.
In his speech, Gen Maj Alex Kagame thanked the Chinese Armed Forces for their journey over the past century, saying that they have become a highly capable force that has contributed to safeguarding China’s security and maintaining international peace and security.
He expressed that Rwanda values ​​its long-standing relationship with China, noting that this relationship continues to expand in various areas, including military and security cooperation.
He said, “Rwanda values ​​its long-standing friendship with China. The bilateral relationship continues to expand in many areas, including military cooperation.”
Gen Maj Alex Kagame said that the cooperation between the Rwandan Armed Forces and the Chinese Armed Forces has already yielded tangible results, especially in terms of developing military capabilities, training and enhancing the skills of soldiers.
He said that China’s support in professional training and specialized knowledge has contributed to maintaining the professionalism and capability of the RDF in fulfilling its missions.
He said, “The cooperation between the Chinese Armed Forces and the Rwandan Armed Forces continues to yield tangible results. China’s assistance in military education and specialized training has made a significant contribution to the ongoing development of the RDF’s capabilities.”
Gen Maj Alex Kagame also said that as the global security landscape continues to change, the militaries of countries need reliable cooperation to enhance capabilities, promote professionalism and work together to maintain peace and security.
He added that Rwanda is ready to continue working with China in promoting peace and security in the region and internationally.
China to further enhance cooperation with RDF
Senior Captain (Navy) Li Dayi, the military attaché at the Chinese Embassy in Rwanda, said that the relationship between the Rwandan Armed Forces and the Chinese Armed Forces continues to develop through training, knowledge exchange and capacity building.
He said that the cooperation between the two militaries is an important part of the overall Rwanda-China relationship, and that it has already yielded results in developing the capabilities of both institutions.
Li Dayi said that China is willing to continue to develop military-to-military relations with Rwanda, based on mutual respect and common interests, with a view to contributing to maintaining peace and security.
He noted that China and Rwanda have a long history of cooperation, with military cooperation being one of the areas that have strengthened the friendship between the two countries.
Li Dayi said that China is ready to work with Rwanda to further develop the bilateral military-to-military relations, with the aim of contributing to regional peace and security and promoting common development.
The anniversary celebrations came as Rwanda and China continue to develop relations in various fields, with military cooperation remaining one of the key pillars of this relationship.
*Rwanda Police conclude training on protecting leaders and combating terrorism, 23 July 2026. The Deputy Commissioner of Police for Operations, CP Vincent Sano, concluded a training aimed at enhancing the capabilities of police officers in protecting dignitaries, combating terrorism in cities, quelling protests and restoring public order.
The training, which concluded on Thursday, was organized in collaboration with the Rwanda National Police and a special unit in the Qatari security forces known as Lekhwiya. It was attended by 209 police officers.
It lasted six weeks at the Counter-Terrorism Training Center (CTTC) located in Mayange, Bugesera District.
During the training, the participating police officers received new knowledge and skills that will help them improve their responsibilities in protecting people and property, as well as in dealing with activities that may disrupt public order.
The training focused on topics including how to protect dignitaries, deal with acts of terrorism in urban areas, quell protests and restore calm in the event of security incidents.
At the conclusion of the training, CP Vincent Sano commended the organizers and participants for their efforts, noting that enhancing the capacity of the police is essential in addressing new security challenges.
The Rwanda National Police continues to enhance the skills of police officers through various training courses aimed at enhancing their capacity to protect national security and confront acts that could undermine it.
*Nangaa sees Joseph Kabila as key to solving DRC's problems, 23 July 2026. The leader of the AFC/M23 alliance, Corneille Nangaa Yobeluo, said that Joseph Kabila, who led the Democratic Republic of Congo from 2001 to 2019, is a key figure who should be used to solve the country's problems because of his experience in governance and history.
Nangaa said this in an interview on the Grand Lacs News YouTube channel, when asked about his relationship with Kabila, who now lives in the area controlled by AFC/M23, and the role he can play in the political problems the DRC is facing.
He said that in other countries, former heads of state are considered people who are still useful, and are used to build the country, instead of being sidelined after leaving power.
He said, "In other countries, a former head of state is an asset. In Kenya, you see how they treat former heads of state. In Ghana, you see how they are treated, even in South Africa, they are assets of their countries."
Nangaa said that the DRC has a problem of not capitalizing on the experience of previous leaders, and that Kabila is one of the people with a history who can contribute to solving the country's problems.
He pointed out that sometimes countries ask former heads of state to help them solve problems, ignoring experienced former leaders who know how to solve them.
He said, "When it comes to mediation, it is former heads of state who are brought in to solve our problems, and yet they do not know the problems you have. But you have someone. So why are you using him?"
Regarding his relationship with Joseph Kabila, Nangaa said that he is in good standing, portraying him as a former leader who deserves respect.
"We have a very good relationship. Our leader, a former Head of State, a former President, deserves respect."
Nangaa also said that Kabila still has a say in DRC politics, saying, "Does he still have a say? The answer is yes."
The politician continued to say that Kabila's long leadership of the DRC gives him a responsibility in the country's journey, expressing his desire for him to participate in the efforts aimed at saving the country.
Regarding the AFC/M23, which was once suspected of instigating a bad atmosphere, Nangaa said that the conflict is between fighters or members of this group, indicating that M23 and AFC are the same entity.
He said, "M23 or AFC are not two different things."
Corneille Nangaa gave this message when in September 2025, the DRC's High Military Court convicted Kabila of involvement in the war in the east of the country, where it sentenced him to death.
Currently, President Félix Tshisekedi of the DRC is preparing for "indefinite talks" to unite the Congolese people. He reportedly does not want representatives of the AFC/M23 and Kabila to attend.
*Gen Muhoozi Kainerugaba in Kigali, 25 July 2026. The Chief of Staff of the Ugandan Armed Forces and Special Adviser to President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni on Military Operations, Gen Muhoozi Kainerugaba, has arrived in Rwanda.
Upon his arrival at Kigali International Airport on 25 July 2026, Gen Muhoozi was received by the Chief of Staff of the Rwandan Armed Forces, Gen Mubarakh Muganga.
Other officials who received Gen Muhoozi included the Commander of the Rwandan Armed Forces' Security Corps, Gen Maj Willy Rwagasana, and the Military Adviser at the Ugandan Embassy, ​​Col Ezekiel Matsiko.
During the two-day visit, Gen Muhoozi is expected to discuss with senior Rwandan military leaders on strengthening military ties between the two countries, and will also hold talks with President Paul Kagame.
Gen Muhoozi was last in Rwanda in March 2025. At that time, he discussed with senior Rwandan military leaders on bilateral cooperation, and visited the Nyakinama Military Academy in Musanze District.
At the academy, Gen Muhoozi delivered lectures on African cooperation in maintaining peace and security.
The soldier indicated that when the Ugandan and Rwandan Armed Forces have the same capabilities, no problem can overcome them.
*AFC/M23 and Twirwaneho continue to expand their bases, 27 July 2026. The four-and-a-half-year war in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo continues to change its face, with the AFC/M23 and MRDP-Twirwaneho alliances continuing to expand their bases in various parts of North Kivu and South Kivu.
The Critical Threats report, which collects and analyzes security information in various countries, shows that as of 24 July 2026, AFC/M23 continued to fight in Masisi Territory, Walikale and the South Kivu highlands.
Last week, the alliance said it had trained and recruited more than 9,318 new fighters, in addition to the more than 30,000 it had previously identified, as confirmed by United Nations experts.
The Commander-in-Chief of the AFC/M23, Gen Maj Sultani Makenga, informed the fighters who were being trained at the Tshanzu military base in North Kivu that their comrades who joined the group last year had played a key role in capturing parts of the highlands.
Gen Maj Makenga gave the fighters a mission to help their comrades liberate other parts of the country to free the country from the grip of President Félix Tshisekedi, who he accuses of mismanagement.
On July 20, Gen Maj Makenga said, “Let us liberate our brothers, let us liberate our country, let us liberate our community. If you do this, it will make you proud because you will be liberating your country, liberating your brothers, liberating the Congolese people in general.”
Last week, the DRC government forces launched attacks to retake parts of the highlands in South Kivu, including Minembwe and Point-Zéro, but were repelled by MRDP-Twirwaneho, which is allied with AFC/M23.
On July 25, 2026, Twirwaneho spokesman Col Kamasa Ndakize Welcome announced that their fighters had captured the Kipupu center in the Itombwe sector of Mwenga Territory.
In a video message, Col Kamasa said, “Here we are in Gipupu in the sector, in fact, the Gipupu center.”
On July 26, Col Fidèle Rugabo, one of Twirwaneho’s senior officers, was also seen in Gipupu, planning that the entire Itombwe sector would soon be captured.
Fighting also pitted AFC/M23 against Wazalendo groups in Masisi and Walikale, as both sides sought to control key routes linking North and South Kivu.
Wazalendo, backed by DRC government forces, has long attempted to wrest back territory it seized from AFC/M23 in Masisi and Walikale, but has been repeatedly pushed back, sometimes losing ground.
*Are FDLR fighters injured in the DRC being treated in Burundi?, 28 July 2026. One of the stories that continues to dominate events in Burundi and the Great Lakes region in general is how the country's army and allied groups continue to suffer from the fighting in South Kivu Province in eastern Democratic Republic of Congo.
However, there is a part of this story that has been kept top secret but is being revealed by some concerned Burundians, including security officials, doctors and the human rights activist who founded the FOCODE organization, Pacifique Nininahazwe.
Nininahazwe announced that the wounded from the war in the DRC, including Wazalendo and those suspected of being members of the FDLR terrorist group, are being treated in private and expensive hospitals in Bujumbura, including the Tanganyika Care Polyclinic.
He said that for the first time, this information was received by Burundians who went to the hospital branch located in Nyabugete in the Muha zone, after finding that the security there was compromised by soldiers, where wounded people were being treated, including those who spoke Lingala, Swahili, French and Kinyarwanda.
As he explained, residents told him that they had received information that these wounded people, who call themselves Wazalendo, told them that they were brought to this hospital by one of the leaders of the Imbonerakure group called Willy Habarishize known as ‘Brig Gen Kanyisha’.
He said, “They say that he is in command of two Imbonerakure battalions that were sent to fight in Wazalendo. He also gives himself ranks, now he is said to be a Brigade General, and when they show him in photos, you can see that he is wearing military uniform.”
He continued, “So that’s the one who brought Wazalendo who said they were injured in the recent war in Congo, others who said they had a car accident, and they said they were targeted by M23.”
Nininahazwe explained that this information prompted him to start investigating to find out if these hospitals are actually treating Wazalendo and FDLR wounded, and he spoke to doctors, who told him that the fact that there are Kinyarwanda speakers does not mean that these are Rwandans.
He said, “Some of those who approached the hospital’s leaders came to us. When they came to us, the first thing they said was, ‘The story you said that there were Congolese fighters who were being treated here is true. 80% of the patients there are now those fighters. Even though they are fighters, there is no proof that they are FDLR, you should not continue to say that.”
The Burundian explained that for the third time, he spoke to the hospital authorities, who admitted to him that there were many fighters being treated in their branch in Nyabugete but that there were also others at their headquarters who were seriously ill.
Nininahazwe said that he had received further reports of the great resentment of the Burundian soldiers being treated in these hospitals, admitting that they were with the fighters who were wounded in the DRC but that what hurt them most and surprised them was that these fighters were treated better than them.
He received further serious information from soldiers who visited the hospital in Nyabugete, who explained to him that they had found that a Rwandan who had been rumored to be an FDLR fighter for many years was frequently visiting the wounded there and providing them with assistance.
He said, “Some of the soldiers said, ‘We went to Nyabugete and looked at it, we saw the sick there. We also found out that there is a well-known person in Burundi who has been there for several years, a Rwandan man from the Netherlands who many say is a well-known FDLR member. He is the one who comes to see them in Nyabugete, and you see that he helps them.’”
Nininahazwe indicated that the story of this Rwandan visiting these wounded and who is said to be an FDLR fighter led him to begin to believe that among those being treated in these hospitals are members of this group that aims to destabilize Rwanda.
The Burundian government has been rumored to be working with the FDLR terrorist group for many years. One of the most serious signs that has recently emerged is the way it received its fighters in military camps when they fled in early December 2025 after the AFC/M23 coalition captured the town of Uvira.
*Rwanda sends 39 Congolese ex-FDLR fighters to DRC, July 29, 2026. The Rwandan Commission for the Rehabilitation of Ex-Soldiers, RDRC, announced that it has returned to the Democratic Republic of Congo 39 Congolese ex-FDLR fighters who were falsely accused of being former members of the terrorist group.
The commission explained that the operation took place on July 29, 2026, in the presence of the media and officials from the United Nations peacekeeping mission in the DRC (MONUSCO).
It said: "The RDRC returned the 39 Congolese ex-FDLR fighters on July 19, 2026, after an assessment confirmed that they had falsely claimed to be former FDLR fighters, and therefore did not meet the requirements of Rwanda's ex-soldiers' rehabilitation program."
On July 29, 2026, AFC/M23 spokesman Lawrence Kanyuka announced that the DRC government is recruiting people to pose as FDLR fighters and offer them money.
Kanyuka explained that after being offered money, the Congolese would be integrated into a democratic reintegration (DDR) program led and implemented by MONUSCO.
The forum explained that these activities are aimed at hiding the real FDLR fighters; a group that the DRC government is required to dismantle under the peace agreement it signed with Rwanda last year, with the assistance of the United States.
Kanyuka accused the DRC government of continuing to give the FDLR a place in the country's security forces, saying that some members of the group have been integrated into government forces and Wazalendo armed groups.
He said, “Kinshasa uses the FDLR as an important part of its security apparatus. Members of this group are included in the FARDC, in the Wazalendo groups and in the state security apparatus.”
He continued by saying that there are also FDLR fighters used in the unit responsible for protecting senior government officials (GR) and other important people.
AFC/M23 called for an end to the activities of asking citizens to identify themselves as FDLR fighters, stating that they are intended to mislead the people of the DRC and the international community.
By Jeff Buleli